One doesn't have to look very far back
in history to know that we've come
through substantial market volatility.
Although we've had an enjoyed one
of the longest runs of equity
bull market experience in history,
we still have had equity market
volatility over recent horizons.
And over and
across the great financial crisis,
and the market volatility associated
with it during and after.
It turns out that this affects investors,
and
is a critical piece of what we might
think about in the fintech space,
both are with respect to clients
like the millennial generation.
But also across the entire
range of demographics.
Part of what we know has been informed by
the concept of the Depression Baby Affect.
Sociologists know this effect as being
the behavioral characteristics and
actions taken or not taken by those
who lived through The Great Depression
in the United States in the first
part of the last century.
Or, in fact, as it turns out,
the behaviors of their progeny.
They're often reported as
being less tolerant of risk,
and being people who save more.
Some sociologists tell us that
they're actually less garrulous, and
perhaps at the margin might be more
introverted than previous generations.
Researchers have found that this
characteristic is not one only of
deep market volatility or
market crashes, or economic depressions.
But may in fact, be a characteristic
simply of traditional levels of
volatility as well as the extremes.
A couple years ago, Malmendier and
Nagel published an article called
Depression Babies, Do Macroeconomic
Experiences Affect Risk Taking?
In which they examined the experiences of
investors across large periods of time,
studying the market experiences,
volatility of markets,
and then their subsequent
willingness to take risks.
What they found was that investor market
experience clearly impacts risk aversion,
risk capacity, and the actual subsequent
taking of risk in financial markets.
They found that investors who have earned
low stock market returns in the past
are less likely to take financial risk.
Are less likely to participate in the
stock market when they are taking risks,
and investing less more generally,
given that they have had recent
low stock market returns.
It turns out that more recent experiences
have stronger effects on investors' risk
appetites.
And that especially when these risk
experiences happen earlier in life,
they can have longer lasting effects.
What they found was that when
they compared differences,
in previous stock market returns,
to future stock market
participation, a positive
relationship resulted.
Of course life time effects or
life cycle effects have to be handled.
In other words, traditional financial
planning thinking suggests that
when investors are older, they can,
should and do take lower levels of risk.
In part, because they have a shorter
horizon in which to make up any
shortfalls or losses,
compared to when they're younger.
When they have a longer horizon,
they're more apt or able to bear risk.
So what Malmendier and
Nagel cleverly did was to integrate
out the old versus young effect.
What we find when we look at their
results in the graph in front of you,
is a positive and strongly statistically
significant relationship comparing
previous market experience, market results
to future stock market participation.
In other words, when stock market
returns were low in the past,
future stock market participation was low.
When market returns were high in the past,
future market participation was high.
In other words,
people's ability to take risk was
not just about the Great Depression.
It was about market experiences and
the continuum of market experiences.
Well, we find that that's also
true construed across cohorts.
We find that this sensitivity
to risk aversion and
how it affects millennials more
strongly is born out by current data,
and data in particular, following
behavior through the financial crisis.
In the graph in front of you provided
by the Investment Company Institute's
annual profile of mutual fund
shareholders, coupled together by us
going back to 1998,
through the periods ending in 2018,
we see that well as financial
planning tenants would tell us,
those who are older are less
likely to take risk.
The question specifically asked whether
you are willing to take above average or
substantial risk in your
investment portfolio?
So the data from 1998, say that 16% of
those who are 65 or older would be willing
to take above average or substantial risk,
corresponding to the traditional logic.
When you're older, you're less likely and
you're less able to handle risk,
given your life expectancies.
If you go the the 50 to 64 crowd,
well, 35% were interested or
willing to take above average or
substantial risk.
If you go to the 35 to 49 crowd,
it goes up to 39%.
If you go down to the younger than 35,
you're all the way up to 50%,
more than 50%, 52%.
Those younger than 35 are willing
to take above average or
substantial risk in your portfolio, fine.
However, what you see, when you look at
volatility across the financial crisis.
So for example, if you could look at 2004,
but then especially in 2009,
11, 15 and 17, the younger generations,
the millennial segment,
rapidly fell in their willingness
to take risk in their portfolios.
Between 98 in 2011,
the number went from 52% to 31%.
Compare that to the 65 or
older cog, for example,
that went from 16%,
in fact, in 2011 to 18%,
their interest and
willingness to take risk went up.
For the 50 to 64, 98 to 2011,
it went from 35 to 26.
For the 35 to 49,
it went from 39 in 2018,
to 38 in 2011.
The Malmendier and
Nagel results were born out.
The younger cohorts had
a greater affect in their
experiences facing market
volatility than older cohorts.
And in fact, they have still not
recovered back to the 1998 levels.
It turns out, one of the most
important target markets of FinTech
activities is not only risk averse today,
compared to historical levels,
they're most sensitive to risk,.
And as Malmendier and Nagel remind us,
it could take decades for
them to move back into risk.
That holds open the promise for
robo advisory.
Representing both a tailwind, but
also a potential headwind to the actual
activity of risk taking and
financial advising.